docs(ampd): add release process guide (#786)
axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier: ampd/ampd-release.md

> # AMPD Release Process
> 
> **For maintainers only**
> 
> This document outlines the step-by-step process for releasing a new version of AMPD. This guide is intended for team members who are responsible for managing releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# `ampd` Release Process

**For maintainers only**

This document outlines the step-by-step process for releasing a new version of `ampd`. This guide is intended for team members who are responsible for managing releases.
```
lowercase everywhere?

## Prerequisites

- Access to the [axelar-amplifier](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier) repository
- Access to the private [infrastructure](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/infrastructure) repository

## Release Process

### 1. Update and Tag Release Version

1. Navigate to the [Update and tag release version](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier/actions/workflows/release.yaml) GitHub Action.
2. Run the workflow with the following:
   - Use workflow from: `main` branch
   - Enter `ampd` as the package input
   - **IMPORTANT**: For the first run, enable "Dry run" to verify everything works correctly

3. After confirming the dry run completed successfully, run the workflow again with "Dry run" disabled to create the actual release tag.

> 

Reviewer: We should create a release [doc](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-contract-deployments/tree/main/releases) for ampd that verifiers can refer for how to apply the new release. E.g. for the upcoming release, we need to tell verifiers how to change their configs

Author: How are we currently letting verifiers know what they should do?

Author: Pushed a template file.

### 2. Update the Changelog

> 1. Create a PR to update the root level `CHANGELOG.md` file based on the newly created tag from step 1.

Reviewer: Changelog should be kept up-to-date in every PR that makes changes to `ampd`. This is a more common release practice.

2. Update the changelog header section with the new version information.

Example changes:

```diff
- [Full Changelog](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier/compare/ampd-v1.5.0..HEAD)
+ [Full Changelog](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier/compare/ampd-v1.5.1..HEAD)
+ 
+ ## [v1.5.1](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier/tree/ampd-v1.5.1) (2025-03-26)
+ 
+ [Full Changelog](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier/compare/ampd-v1.5.0..ampd-v1.5.1)
+ 
+ - Fix arithmetic operations with XRPLTokenAmount [#780](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier/pull/780)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to do this step before creating the release? Otherwise the changelog is actually missing from the tagged commit

3. Create a PR with these changes and merge it to the `main` branch.

### 3. Build the AMPD Release

1. Navigate to the [Build and release binary and image](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier/actions/workflows/build-ampd-release.yaml) GitHub Action.
2. Run workflow using the newly created tag as input.
3. Verify that a new release appears under the Releases section of the amplifier repository.

### 4. Deploy to Network

#### 4.1 Update Infrastructure Configuration

1. Create a PR in the private [infrastructure](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/infrastructure) repository to update the AMPD tag in the Helm charts for your target network (devnet, testnet, or stagenet).

   Example PR for reference: [link](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/infrastructure/commit/e7dc80160404b75ac8e3b850d834a53e76680eab)

> 

Reviewer: This is an internal repo. There should be an FAQ on how to deploy internally in notion, instead of the public repo

Reviewer 2: I talked to @maancham about that. I still prefer keeping it on the repo, because in notion it will just get lost and not get updated. I don't see any security issues with this, can you elaborate on your concerns?

Reviewer: Generally a bad security practice to discuss internal infra details in public repos. We should create a FAQ notion page for the team that's more easily discoverable. I'd also be ok with linking to that notion page here, but at least the internal details are encapsulated

## Release Process

### 1. Get the release tag (Dry run)

1. Navigate to the [Update and tag release version](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier/actions/workflows/release.yaml) GitHub Action.
2. Run the workflow with the following:
   - Use workflow from: `main` branch
   - Enter `ampd` as the package input
   - **IMPORTANT**: Enable "Dry run" to verify everything works correctly and make a note of the updated tag.

### 2. Ensure the Changelog is updated
In general, Changelog should be kept up-to-date in every PR that makes changes to `ampd`.
1. Create a PR to update the root level `CHANGELOG.md` file based on the new tag from step 1.

> 2. Update the changelog header section with the new version information.

Reviewer: add a step to create the release doc in the deployments repo if a non-trivial action needs to be taken by verifiers (i.e. it's not just restarting with the new binary). Chain integrations team should review and can communicate with verifiers

   - **IMPORTANT**: Enable "Dry run" to verify everything works correctly and make a note of the updated tag.

> ### 2. Create release document and ensure the Changelog is updated

Reviewer: separate this into two independent steps for clarity? create a changelog, and then create the release doc in deployments repo

1. Again, run the [Update and tag release version](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier/actions/workflows/release.yaml) GitHub Action with `ampd` as package and `main` as branch. For this round, disable the "Dry run" option to create the actual release tag.

### 4. Build the `ampd` Release

1. Navigate to the [Build and release binary and image](https://github.com/axelarnetwork/axelar-amplifier/actions/workflows/build-ampd-release.yaml) GitHub Action.
2. Run workflow using the newly created tag as input.
3. Verify that a new release appears under the Releases section of the amplifier repository.

### 5. Deploy to Network

> Follow this [document](https://www.notion.so/bright-ambert-2bd/How-to-deploy-ampd-release-to-live-networks-1c8c53fccb77806ba035fd2ade6b98e8?pvs=4) to learn about the steps needed for network deployments such as devnet, stagenet, and testnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow this [document](https://www.notion.so/bright-ambert-2bd/How-to-deploy-ampd-release-to-live-networks-1c8c53fccb77806ba035fd2ade6b98e8?pvs=4) to update our `ampd` instance.

Furthermore, coordinate with the DevX team to announce the release to external verifiers for testnet/mainnet.
```
